# Data Description
  This DMP is created to outline how data will be managed during my current research project. Investigations focus on modeling biological organisms (bacteria or algae) or complex interactions between these organsims when grown together. Understanding metabolism requirements of algae and bacteria has implications for downstream processing to produce biofuels/bioproducts. Various datasets will be generated from samples collected to produce real-world and virtual data. 
 
 Code to generate a genome-scale constraint-based model that elucidates cellular interactions between organisms and the model itself will be individual datasets. Python and MATLAB+CobraToolBox code will be saved to the PI's hard drive and stored on git throughout the project duration; git will also provide a solid framework for version control. Version control will also be done manually by adding a date to the name file, and keeping a log of the differences. Each code update will have an attached note.
 
 Sampling of aqueous medium and bioreactor headspace will measure rate of nutrient uptake, pH, temperature, irradiance, lipid content, and oxygen availability through use of various probes, Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GCMS), and a microscope. This will be kept in an excel sheet for ease of use during the project but translated into a XLSX. file for long-term preservation. Species growth conditons, growth medium, plant growth measurements, and equations utilized to calculate model inputs (abiotic and biotic interactions) will be documented and stored in a text document. Algae and bacteria cultures will be stored in a tightly controlled environment for the duration of the project or if the cultures die, whichever is first. 
 
 Metabolomics and transcriptomics data must be stored in a repository due to large size. The National Metabolomics Data Repository is chosen to store the large amount of genomic data. The data will be preserved and shared through their internal standards. 
 
 Metadata will include collaborating institution, researcher, date, experimental methods, and growth conditions. No metadata standards are specified for this field of research and since there is no sensitive information generated, metadata will be collected by hand and stored in text file.

Multiple GB to TB of data will be generated. 
  # Roles and Responsibilities
  
 The PI will approve and implemet the DMP and be responsible for making sure the whole research group is following the plan. All collaborators will agree on a DMP that is useful for each lab and research group. In the Oregon State University lab, my PI will implement the plan and oversee the research activities. As the grad student, I will be responsible for data collection, data organization, metadata generation, and instrumentation and control. My PI and I to assess quality control together and we will both be building models from our software. The PI will be in charge of data access control and archiving of the data. 
 
# Storage and security
  Every day data will be stored in XLSX through automatic sampling of the cultures-lots of data will be generated. Files are to be stored on a computer in the labratory and backed up on an external hard drive (for safety) by the PI. Models will be built with software python and MATLAB, stored in GitHub, and model outcomes will be stored as pictures (jpeg) and all csv files with model inputs will be accessible through the supplemental materials in the acadeic journal which publishes our manuscript. Important breakthroughs in the research will be shared through zoom meetings and email. All data will be accessible to all collaborators through Box collaborations (2-step authentification) and github so if a contributor leaves the project, the person next in line on that specific lab will take on the responsibilities. Box will also be utilized for my lab group when preparing the manuscript.  
  
  Data will be retained on the PI's system for minimum 2 years or until subsequent studies utiilizing our data are completed. Data files stored on the computer will be named using a DDMMYYYY-description format and in Github in similar fashion. 
# Access and data sharing
  The genome data and metabolic models will be publicly available for use and re-use and will be accessible when a manuscript is published or 2 years after collection (whichever is sooner). Our data will be available through the academic journal, GibHub, and the Metabolomics data respository. Data content is distributed through the creative commons attribution 4.0 international license. Copy and redistribution of the material in any medium or format is allowed under this license along with transforming or building upon the material for any person (even commercial) with appropriate credit given. 

# Archiving and preservation
Data preservation will be handeled by the academic journal and respository through their standards. The PI will maintain copies of all data in a Box folder for 5 years and download it onto an external harddrive in case of computer malfunction or theft. 
