# Grad521_DMPcummings_2021

Context of the project for DMP:
My research is based off of modeling the complex interactions between biological organisms such as bacterial or algal species, or bacteria and algae together. My advisor and I use MATLAB or Python coding to create integrative, genome-scale, constraint-based models; the data describes how two species growing in co-culture may affect the others growth rate or nutrient availability. In some cases, we may see that the two organisms grow more efficiently together, as in they have a syntrophic relationship. For my thesis work, I plan to collect data on the growth of both algae and bacteria together to determine their cellular interactions for future application in biotechnology, bioenergy, and biofuels. Understanding interactions between organisms allows us (and the biological engineering community) to create environments where these organisms can grow more efficiently and potentially genetically engineer bacterial or algal species for the same reason.
From my understanding, my data will be many many (100’s) GB or a few (2-3) TB depending on how long it takes the organism to grow and how often our parameters are sampled; similar datasets collect information every few seconds and it takes the models a significant amount of time (~ 1 day) to process all of the collected data. Data on rate of nutrient uptake (such as phosphorous or nitrogen), pH, temperature, light irradiance, and oxygen availability are collected* through samples of the microorganism cultures (liquid medium or headspace) and kept in excel spreadsheets. This information helps me characterize the material and energy processing activities of the microorganisms. This experimental/observational data is integrated into a constraint-based model that then simulates the interactions between the various organisms/species being studied and produces graphical results over time. Calculations and equations will also be used to provide a description of the biotic and abiotic interactions of the microorganisms and their environment. 
To re-cap, I will have data on
•	The environmental conditions of bacterial/algal cultures 
•	The growth rates of microorganisms
•	Model simulations of microorganism interactions
•	Equations and theoretical calculations of the interactions 
